Listen carefully. What you will hear now is the voice of a 14-year-old boy who already
has tasted more violence than most people do in a lifetime.
The boy is talking about his father. The man facing you can listen to this sort of thing
without burning a hair. He's a counselor at a Los Angeles County Forestry Camp for
boys who've gotten in trouble. Boys like this 14-year-old who talks almost casually of
drunkenness and stabbing. You'll hear this kid's own story. You'll see how the forestry
camp officials are trying to set him straight. And you'll visit San Quentin. For the story
of this man, Carol Chessman, who began as a juvenile offender and ended up on Death
Road. All this on program 2 of Focus on Delinquency. A special report from the KNXT Department
of Public Affairs. The story begins at Juvenile Hall. Last week, you saw how the hall works.
But to get the flavor of the place, you have to talk with the kids as I did on a bench
beside the football field.
Your folks know your drink? Yes, sir. Don't they mine? Well, I live with my stepdad and
my mom. I don't like stepping and he doesn't like me. Well, what sort of trouble is it,
is it? Oh, the whole trouble. Mostly home trouble. Yeah, your family. It's pretty messed up.
How come? I was probably my fault and then the end of the end of the fall.
Mother and father divorced, didn't they? How long you in court? Well, I went to
queer studenters and set up a camp program for me. How long are you going to be there? Well,
approximately from six, six months to nine. Going back to school and you get out? Yes, sir.
What do you think you'll do when you get out of school? How many ideas? Well, I'll try
not to get any more trouble for one thing. You got a girlfriend outside? Yes, I do a lot of
thinking about her myself, you know. What does she think about all this, you know? Well, I don't know.
She's also ashamed of me. Because she's mostly she, you know, I always tell her what
happened. So, you know, usually when I got in trouble, I'll tell her and then she told me to
go out of my wife's up and go straight, you know. And I told her, yes, I would. I'd just turn
around and, you know, do the worst again. What do you think ought to be done about it to prevent
that sort of trouble? Well, they say there were more things for the kids to do. It would keep
them out of trouble. What do I think they get in here for? Well, it's not. On the mid-lust
times, there's an air fall because sometimes they lose up. You know, see, like they say,
their father and mother don't pay much attention to them. They don't get all the love they're
supposed to get in. Last week, we picked up the composite case of a young
car thief named Eddie Smith. The names and facts are scrambled because California law for
bids identification of juveniles in matters like these. But there are no actors in this
story. The people and the problems are real. And Eddie's problem is especially real for him,
as he returns to court to hear the verdict of Judge William B. McCus. The boy has spent two
weeks in juvenile hall while the authorities investigated his home, his family, and his trouble
with the law. The probation report recommends that Eddie be sent to a county forestry camp. As he
usually does, Judge McCus and follows that recommendation and he makes it an order.
Eddie does go to a forestry camp, away from the neighborhood and friends and environment
that up to now have worked against him. And incidentally, away from the parents who tried
to make things work, but just didn't try hard enough or didn't know. So now, in the case
of Eddie Smith, the law takes over. But let's listen, as the case of Eddie in juvenile court
comes to a conclusion. Stand on your own feet and understand that your conduct
had to be different in order to stay out of trouble. You may have just gone along because
the rest of the guys did it. I think that you would benefit from the opportunity our forestry
camp program, which we have available here for boys in Los Angeles County. We have five
since camps, Mr. Smith. Two of them are what we call our school cast because they're for
boys under 16 where they have full-time day school. The other three are for the boys over
16 where the boys work eight hours a day for the county forestry and fire warden building
fire trails and fighting forest fires and work of that kind.
Now, Eddie, you are under 16 and you're therefore under the compulsory school age in this
state and will be placed in a school camp or you'll go to regular day school. You'll
get credit for this work when you come back into your own school. We don't send the boys
to camp for a fixed length of time, Eddie. Depends on you. Kind of a record you make for
yourself. Our program, of course, divided in the various stages and as you progress through
the various stages, you may do it rapidly and it may take longer. But the kind of record
you make is up to you. You're not sentenced to fixed length of time. That's what I want
to impress upon you and therefore the opportunity is yours by making a good record to shorten
your stay or by making a bad record that it's necessary for you to stay longer.
It's official now. Eddie is legally a ward of the juvenile court of Los Angeles County.
But the important thing to the boy is that he's leaving juvenile hall. No more steel
screens on the windows. No more walls and gates and doors locked against escape. Judge
McKesson has, in effect, decided that Eddie needs a fresh start in fresh new surroundings.
This is one of five forestry camps operated by the county. Back in a secluded canyon,
it's still close enough to get an occasional heavy dose of Los Angeles smog. But even
so, for many of these boys, it's the cleanest air they've ever breathed. The newcomers
are met by a staff member who takes their old clothes. They get a complete outfitting,
denims and work shoes. No fancy teenage styles, but it's just right for outdoor living.
If he never did before, a boy learns to take care of his own clothes. Then the old hands
take the new ones to the dormitory. It's spotlessly clean. The boys do their own housework.
Each has something precious, a rosary, a picture, a guitar, the flag, a crucifix, or an award
perhaps for sports or citizenship. There is full-time schooling here. Many boys who never
took to it before suddenly learn to read and write for the first time. True and C is an
early symptom for many delinquents, and of course, there's none of that here. But it's
not all work and no play. The camp setting is Southern California at its best, beautiful
wooded mountains. The program includes swimming as a reward for good work and good behavior.
It looks like the old swimming hall of a gentler time, and it certainly is invited.
The boys earn their fun. It's their camp. It's up to them to keep it in shape. Responsibility
is a good teacher, and every boy has certain duties he must perform. And you might guess
that in this age group, kitchen duty is the most popular of all. Hungry boys surrounded
by food. The self-reliance idea is carried out in craft classes like woodshop. A boy learns
enough to help him get a job when he leaves, and in the mean time he makes things for himself
and for the camp. The dining hall groups have taken the names of Indian tribes. The signs
are made by the boys themselves. A pointed reminder goes straight. And another reminder of
the right way to live. Not a fence or wall or gate anywhere, and after touring the camp,
I talked with the director, Mr. Eugene Cox, a career man in the probation department.
The boys who run away, why do you think they do it? Several boys that run away, in fact,
quite a percentage, run away simply because they don't have enough stability to face this
type of a challenge in a way. They are able to run away, and they know that we do not
chase them, and since they are somewhat lacking in making good choices, some boys are run away simply
because they can't help it. Other boys will run away because the liberty and the freedom here
is simply too threatening for them and they can't face it. So they will use the usual routine
of running away. The challenge is to speak up, by assuming the very freedom of the camp itself.
Yes, and we try to use that as effectively as possible, given that each boy is much responsibility,
as we think he is able to handle within the program. This, of course, is the responsibility
degree is very slight with new boys and increases gradually as the boy becomes older.
So what are you trying to do with them? By giving them an all-responsibility.
We realize that most boys return to the same community that they leave, and we know that if we,
in some way, can't alter them and improve their basic abilities, the handle of social situations,
that they will become a domain claim again. So by giving them as much responsibility,
social acceptance, and maturity, and equal strength as we can, then we are doing what we know how to do
to enable them to have a better opportunity to behave when they return home.
Cox refers to his camp as around the clock treatment center, not punishment, but treatment.
Perhaps the most important part is the counseling, getting the boy to talk about his home and his
trouble and himself. Again and again, the boys tell of broken homes, the same story with 100 variations.
Judge McKesson tells us that two-thirds of all the boys he sees in court have broken homes behind
them, broken by divorce, desertion, or cold indifference. The staff members who do the counseling
are specially trained, highly skilled at drawing out the youngsters. The boys are looked on not as
prisoners, but patients. The counselor is not a policeman, but more a father-confesser with
training in psychology. It's the counselor's job to understand the boy and help him understand
himself. To get him to talk out his troubles, instead of acting them out, in deeds of violence.
You looked in on this counseling session a few minutes ago. The boy is 14 years old, intelligent,
and good looking. Remember, we had to cut names and places to protect the boy's identity.
This is his story in his own words.
Finally school started and I started it off. School started your problems?
I was the most of them. During the summer time I used to get drunk now and then have a fight.
I didn't do too much damage, but then school started and I met new people, new guys, new girls,
more fun. Friday nights we'd go to show you something. By the way, I'd get a little plaster
to something. I get mad at the other guy because he tried to throw my friend out of something and I jump
up and start fighting with him. One night I finally got a little too high.
It was about four months ago. No, not four. More than that. It was about 10 actually.
I walked into movie theater with a couple of the guys I went on with and other little drunk and
walked in and sat down and he tried to throw out some of the guys.
He said, I just got up and I told him, I was 18 years old and they were with me.
He said, they still got to go. He said, well, you ain't got to throw him out or else.
If you throw him out, you're going to get it. He said to me, you think you can do it.
I said, I don't think I know. So I jumped again and I started swinging with him and everything
and he would have fast-lighted. I pulled out a push button.
Push button, knife, yeah. Got him in the leg. Didn't damage him too much, but I got him in the leg.
How do you mean you didn't damage him too much? Just kind of sliced him.
I didn't go in. I just cut him. There's a difference between sliced him and cut him in a
measure. Jab him. You slash him and you just cut across. You get, well, not too deep of a cut,
you know? Well, I've been a talk about it. It's kind of funny.
Well, right now I just feel it, if it comes to stab him, I wouldn't stab anybody again.
That wasn't one of the things that the police brought you in for. Is that right?
You were in on numerous occasions, is that right? Yes, drunk charges and stuff like that.
My father actually took me in. Your father actually took you in? How do you mean?
Well, my father, well, he don't drink and he don't smoke and stuff, see?
And so I'm one of the, well, out of my whole family, I'm the only one, me and my cousin
about the only ones that have been arrested, smoking, drank, see? And you only lived with your father
a short time about a year or something. Yeah, about a year or two once.
And well, my father's kind of strict on it, saying, you don't like it. So I used to do it anyway.
I didn't care. It was not a business, it was mine. Since he never did anything for me,
I think, what should I do something for him? When he hadn't taken care of you, felt you owed him
nothing and you didn't expect him to give you anything in return, is that right? That's true.
Well, after a while, it kind of got to be a habit. I was hanging around with a bunch of
hoodlums out here. We got together every night, you know, or something. The God messed up,
through God was canned on people's porches and you know messed up, disturbed the peace, you know?
Something to bother somebody. Yeah, felt the need to bother someone. Well, we couldn't just settle down,
we couldn't stay still. We always had to be doing something. Kind of restless, nervous.
I said, no, he's got to be on a move. He can't stay in one spot tomorrow.
Well, like, you know, when I was a girl at that one, we went to a dance church, you know,
church, you know, a little deals, you know? So we went up there enough. So I got home about five
after ten. I started writing out this voluntary report of mine. To the police. Yes,
for the old man, it's mad about it, you know? He said, let me read it. I said, there was
none of his business. So he said, what'd you say? And I said, you heard me and he hit me in the back
in the neck. I got mad about, and I jumped up and I told him, all right, you want to do it that way,
let's get out with it. I hit him. So when I need to pull out his belt, he started to hit me with a
bug buckle and I got mad about it. I told him, let me, like a man, like a coward. He wouldn't. So
he turned around the walk away and I jumped him. And I had him in the corner where I was kicking him
with a punch and I did everything. Finally, he just landed what good when that was it. I was out.
So finally, call the cops about a little bit like he woke me up, you know?
I fell asleep and went, everything. Just, you know how it is? Just see how I saw him.
I brought you the juvenile hall and that's where he placed you.
You learn a lot from these kids, like the difference between slicing and stabbing.
That boy was a newcomer to camp in there only a couple of weeks, but already he's talking
easily, working hard in school, and for the first time in his life, he's found a place. He's
fitting in. The counselors think it's a good bet he'll make the grade. Now we'll listen in on
another boy who's been around longer. He's stopped talking about the violence and hatred that got him
in trouble. He's beginning to understand himself and his home, though for these boys, home is a
word that has strange meanings. Before I got in trouble, I used to go home and I used to sit there,
and I want to tell my mother, things would happen, you know? But I used to sit down there, she just
used to look at me and tell me, well, you don't want to talk to me. You just, you know, you just want
to be funny, you know? And I never got to ever say anything to my mother. I really wanted to get
down to her. I used to call her mother because, well, I just heard that. You know, I mean, she was my
mother. That's the only reason. I mean, I didn't have no feeling in storage as anybody, as I would
anybody else. I mean, I don't know how she feel about me. She says she makes me and all that.
She says I'm her son, but still, I mean, I never had much feeling, you know, and my home, I mean,
I can't remember what my mother used to, you know, picking me up and putting her out from me and
seeing I was her son because when they used to go out, then they never asked me if I wanted to go
with them or anything. I mean, I mean, even if they did, probably I wouldn't want to do it anyway,
you know? Because, I mean, every time I used to be home, I just wanted to get out of the house. I couldn't,
I couldn't stand being there, you know? I didn't like to be home with them when they were in the house.
I used to get up and walk by myself because my mother, well, I don't know, she just,
I guess she wasn't used to it either, like I'm not used to it, you know? Yeah. But maybe that
isn't the reason, but still, I mean, other people used to come to the house and she used to tell me,
she used to how that meant everything when other people was there, you know? So, they were said,
so then when people used to be there, you used to leave the house, you know?
Oh, my father, I mean, I only see him, you know, a couple of times. I used to see him, I only
called him a father because, well, you know, the people see you're fathering. I don't know, well,
my father sees me, he acts nice to everything, but still, I mean, you can see them when he
does, he's just trying to get back at my mother, you know? He's trying to get back at my mother
through me, you know, not that he likes me or anything, they're each trying to, you know, fight, fight,
fight, fight, they got me as a weapon, you know? The mother doesn't want me to see my father,
my father wants me to come and do it, it's not because he likes me, but try and get back at each other,
you know? So, have you in between now? Yeah, because I mean, I mean, I could be wrong, you know?
But I mean, I think I should know more than anybody else, you know? But how much good does it do?
How many of these boys leave camp? Never again to tangle with the law. The camp director, Mr. Cox,
puts his success record between 70 and 80 percent. And at juvenile hall, when I asked the same
question about success or failure, I got this answer from Mr. Clarence Cabell, the chief boys
counselor. The talkers though a lot of them do make good, but how about those who don't? What
happens to them? Well, unfortunately, we have occasion to go to the different institutions in
the California and the honor farm and what I would consider the end of the live San Quentin,
and the majority of the boys that end up in San Quentin have been boys that have repeated
here so many times that we have told them that they're going to San Quentin if they didn't straighten
up. And occasionally they walk up to you in institutions such as San Quentin and say, well,
you told me so. So it's a pretty saddening thing to me to see them there, but although you have a
feeling they're going to go years before it happens. There's one who made it in a hurry. Carol Chessman,
the most notorious criminal since John Dillinger, the most publicized prison author of this century.
And for his story, from his own lips, we went next to San Quentin. It's on a cold, windy arm of the
Bay north of San Francisco. It's the biggest prison in California, 5,000 inmates. This is the
big yard, every square inch of it under constant watch by the armed men on the gun walks.
And this is death row, the small barred windows at the top of the North Salt Block.
Chessman and 17 others are up there waiting to die. The size of the place is staggering,
but it's not nearly big enough so they're doubling up two men to a cell. There are four blocks
like this, hundreds of cells in each, five tiers high, a tremendous place with an odor that seems
to linger on even after you leave. I toured the prison with the director of the State Department of
Corrections, Richard McGee on the left and San Quentin's Warden Harley O'Teats. McGee and Warden
Teats. They showed me Chessman's record. It's a long record, page after page of hand-lettered
notations, dates, offenses, execution dates and delays. The record shows that Chessman once was a
troublemaker in prison, fights with other cons and that sort of thing. But since he began writing
nearly four years ago, he's had no trouble at all. He's fought only with the legal authorities
of the State of California, fighting to save his life. The date 1941 was the first time he made
San Quentin. He was 20 years old. After going through Chessman's record, there was one more stop
before meeting the man himself. It was the little room that Chessman so far has avoided. The cell
where condemned prisoners spend the last night and the gas chamber where the State has taken the lives
of 182 persons. It made me sick to my stomach and I needed the cold blast of air from the bay that
hit us when we left. I'd seen what Chessman is fighting, now I'd meet him and hear what he has to say.
The visiting room was crowded but condemned men received their visitors over in the corner,
a dim barred alcove where no cameras are allowed, no cameras and no recording.
I'd read Chessman's books, sell two four five five death row, and trial by ordeal. I'd read his
books and I'd read his record. I talked with him for a full hour, then they took him back to death row.
While it was still fresh in my mind, I went over my notes of what he was like and what he'd said.
I've just come from seeing Carol Chessman. Here in the high security visiting cell at San Quentin.
Maybe you wonder why we're bringing him into this series on juvenile crime.
But you have to remember, that Chessman went the whole route. He started out with the juvenile
camps and schools and he's gone through most of them in the state. And now he's at the final end
of the line, death row at San Quentin, waiting for the gas chamber. And when I told Chessman what we
were doing on this series, he at first didn't seem interested. He wanted to know if it had
been doing good for the kids who needed help. And I told him that we're going to show this series
in all the juvenile halls and forestry camps in the state. And then he said he'd be willing to talk
to us. He said the first thing to do, and handling kids who get in trouble, is to make the youngsters
feel that they want to be on the right side. But they should be instead of just making it a game of
cops and robbers. Chessman says that's what it was too often with him when he was a kid. Chessman said,
youngsters have trouble adjusting to any authority. And when the authority figure that's presented
to them is presented as an enemy, and there's bound to be an explosion of some kind. He says what we
have to do is find what's right with youngsters, instead of telling them over and over what's wrong.
I told him I couldn't help but feel that he was so detached in talking about himself and his
predicament. It was almost clinical as though we were looking at the whole thing from somewhere on
the outside. And Chessman's reply was that he had to take that attitude in self-defense.
It was either become detached or end up in Mendocino, for hospital for the criminally insane.
And what a Chessman seemed even more detached and unreal is that heavy steel screen mesh that they
put between you and the prisoner you're visiting. It's kind of hard to see through the light
bounces off and hard to keep your eyes in focus. And again and again I found myself listening to a
voice that seemed to have nobody. I kept trying to get him back to the point of what he'd have to say
to kids. He says that a lot of them are going through just what he did except that there are many
more of them now. And he tells them this. He says get out of it now. It's a dirty business.
There's no glamour, said Chessman, in seven years on death row. He said capsules have brought
her dangerous. And when he was young and he'd heard from guys who had had it at San Quentin or at
Folsom, he felt that the prison people had broken the will of the men he knew, that they'd broken
them completely. And when they told Chessman and the other kids to lay off and to get out, Chessman
laughed at them. But now he says tell the kids what it takes guts to go straight to. It takes a lot
more guts to get out of it and to stay in it. That's the way it looks to him now looking back
over the years from his cell in San Quentin. But Chessman says he wants to make it clear that he
doesn't think he's a smart ally. And that he doesn't think he's a hero that any kid ought to be looking
up to. He says to tell the kids that he knows he's not smart. And he knows he's probably the dumbest
smart guy who ever went to cue. Chessman says finally that for every kid who looks as though he's
going over the edge there ought to be a challenge or a responsibility given to him. Something to do
instead of something to be taken away from him. So all of them he says wants something. It's up to
us to find out what it is and provide it.
Kids in trouble. We've seen a lot of them and we've heard their stories. Next week the juvenile
problem as it looks to the police officers, judges and churchmen of our community.
This has been a KNXT television production.